Hello friends
In this video let us learn how to perform binary
search using divide and conquer algorithm.
So we have already learned binary search using the normal
method.
If you're unfamiliar with the binary search concept,
you can watch the binary search video under the searching
algorithms section.
In this video let us learn how to solve the binary
search with a divide and conquer algorithm
So in the normal approach whenever the middle element is
not matching, we will change the start and end index
accordingly
In this approach, if the middle element is not matching we
will divide the respective sub array and continue the same
process
using recursion. Let us see how.
Let us take a sorted array of eight elements
10 23 45 70 90 100 111 123 and indices start from
0 to 7.
So start is equal to zero and end is equal to seven
And remember the array should be sorted in order to apply
The binary search algorithm. Let us assume the key to be
found is 45.
So what will binary search algorithm do? It will
calculate the middle index and if the middle index matches
the key
The search is found. Otherwise,
It will skip on the sub array and do the
same process until it finds the element.
Here the start index is zero and end index is seven
So middle index will be (0+7)/2 which is 3. So check
If index three has the value 45 and it is
not. Index three has the value 70.
And since the array is in sorted order, the key
45 should be present before index three.
So the divide and conquer algorithm will divide the
sub array from index 0 to 2 and do the same process
Here mid is equal to (0+2)/2
which is one.
So the middle index is equal to one. So check
if it has the value 45 but it has the
value 23 and since 45 is greater than 23
If 45 is present in the array, it should be
present in the right sub array only.
That is after 23. So the divide and conquer algorithm
will divide the sub array where the starting and ending is 2
Now the Mid index is equal to (2+2)/2
which is two and index two has
the value 45, which means our search is found.
So let's see the code for binary search function and
explain it using the same case.
So here we have the binary search function and we
will pass the start of the array and the end of the array and
the key to be searched into the function
So here this is the array. It's start
is equal to zero and end is equal to seven and the key
to be searched is 45
So we have to find the middle element
Check if it is the key, else find where the key
can be present and divide the array and search in
one sub array only.
So we have to do this process till we find
the key or we get an invalid index
So put the code inside this if start less than
or equal to end and find mid first that is
(start+end)/2 that is seven by two
which is equal to three.
So check if the element at index has the key 45
and it is not. So check
If this middle element is less than the key and
it is not. So 45 can only be present in
the left part.
So we have return binary search of array, start 0
mid-1 that is 2 and key 45
So from binary search function, we are calling binary search
with the same array, start as zero and end as two
let us say this is binary search1. And whatever
this function binary search1 is retruning,
That value will be returned by this main binary search also.
So let us see what happens here. Here start is less
than end. So find mid and it will be
2/2 equal to one. So check if element at
index 1 is the key and it is not.
So check if this mddle element is less than key, and it is.
So 45 can only be present in the right
part of this sub array. So we are calling
binary search again.
So we have binary search of arr, start as mid+1
which is two and end as two and key 45.
So let us call this binary search2. So we
had main binary search calling binarysearch1
and binary search1 is calling binary search2
So let us see what happens in binary search2. Here Start is
equal to end. So find mid which is (2+2)
divided by two equal to two
So check if element at middle index two, is the
key and it is. So return one
As the search is found
So binary search2 is returning 1 to binary search1
and binary search1  is returning one to this main
binary search function and finally this function will return the
result one to main function.
So this is how we implement binary search using divide
and conquer approach
So what are the three steps in the divide and conquer
approach? Divide, conquer and combine. Here Splitting the sub
array is equal to dividing the problem.
Finding the middle index and checking whether it has the
key or solution is conquering the problem and returning search
found status that is  result from various recursive
calls is known as combining.
So this is a perfect example of the divide and
conquer algorithm
This is how the divide and conquer algorithm recursively
divide the original array and search the given key
And finally the result is gathered from those recursive calls.